<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-1-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
			<p>A deep red glow flushed the fronts of marble palaces piled up on the slope of an arid mountain whose barren ridge traced high on the darkening sky a ghostly and glimmering outline. The winter sun was setting over the Gulf of Genoa. Behind the massive shore the sky to the east was like darkening glass. The open water too had a glassy look with a purple sheen in which the evening light lingered as if clinging to the water. The sails of, a few becalmed feluccas looked rosy and cheerful, motionless in the gathering gloom. Their heads were all pointing towards the superb city. Within the long jetty with the squat round tower at the end, the water of the harbour had turned black. A bigger vessel with square sails, issuing from it and arrested by the sudden descent of the calm, faced the red disc of the sun. Her ensign hung down and its colours were not to be made out; but a lank man in a shabby sailor‚Äôs jacket and wearing a strange cap with a tassel, who lounged with both his arms thrown over the black breech of an enormous piece of ordnance that with three of its monstrous fellows squatted on the platform of the tower, seemed to have no doubt of her nationality; for to the question of a young civilian in a long coat and Hessian boots and with an ingenuous young countenance above the folds of a white neckcloth he answered curtly, taking a short pipe out of his mouth but not turning his head.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShe‚Äôs Elban.‚Äù</p>
			<p>He replaced his pipe and preserved an unsociable air. The elegant young man with the pleasant countenance, (who was Cosmo, the son of Sir Charles Latham of Latham Hall, Yorkshire), repeated under his breath, ‚ÄúElban,‚Äù and remained wrapped up in still contemplation of the becalmed ship with her undistinguishable flag.</p>
			<p>It was not till the sun had sunk beneath the waters of the Mediterranean and the undistinguishable flag had been hauled down on board the motionless ship that he stirred and turned his eyes towards the harbour. The nearest prominent object in it was the imposing shape of an English line-of-battle ship moored on the west side not far from the quay. Her tall spars overtopped the roofs of the houses and the English ensign at her flagstaff had been just hauled down and replaced by a lantern that looked strange in the clear twilight. The forms of shipping crowded towards the head of the harbour were merging into one another. Cosmo let his eyes wander over the circular platform of the tower. The man leaning over the gun went on smoking with indifference.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAre you the guardian of this tower?‚Äù asked the young man.</p>
			<p>The other gave him a sidelong glance and made answer without changing his attitude and more as if speaking to himself:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThis is now an unguarded spot. The wars are over.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDo they close the door at the bottom of this tower at night?‚Äù enquired Cosmo.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat is a matter worth consideration especially for those like you, for instance, who have a soft bed to go to for the night.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The young than put his head on one side and looked at his interlocutor with a faint smile.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou don‚Äôt seem to care,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúSo I conclude I need not. As long as you are content to stay here I am safe enough. I followed you up the stairs, you know.‚Äù The man with the pipe stood up abruptly. ‚ÄúYou followed me here? Why did you do that, in the name of all the saints?‚Äù</p>
			<p>The young man laughed as if at a good joke. ‚ÄúBecause you were walking in front of me. There was nobody else in view near the Mole. Suddenly you disappeared. Then I saw that the door at the bottom of the tower was open and I walked up the stairs on to this platform. And I would have been very surprised if I hadn‚Äôt found you here.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The man in the strange cap ornamented with a tassel had taken his pipe out of his mouth to listen. ‚ÄúThat was all?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes, that was all.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNobody but an Englishman would behave like that,‚Äù commented the other to himself, a slight appearance of apprehension passing over his features. ‚ÄúYou are an eccentric people.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt see anything eccentric in what I‚Äôve done. I simply wanted to walk out of the town. The Mole was as good as any other part. It is very pleasant here.‚Äù</p>
			<p>A slight breeze touched the two men‚Äôs faces, while they stood silent, looking at each other. ‚ÄúI am but an idle traveller,‚Äù said Cosmo easily. ‚ÄúI arrived this morning by land. I am glad I had the idea to come out here to behold your town glowing in the sunset and to get a sight of a vessel belonging to Elba. There can‚Äôt be very many of them. But you, my friend‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI have as much right to idle away my time here as any English traveller,‚Äù interrupted the man hastily.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt is very pleasant here,‚Äù repeated the young traveller, staring into the dusk which had invaded the platform of the tower.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúPleasant?‚Äù repeated the other. ‚ÄúYes, perhaps. The last time I was on this platform I was only ten years old. A solid round shot was spinning and rattling all over the stone floor. It made a wondrous disturbance and seemed a living thing full of fury.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúA solid shot!‚Äù exclaimed Cosmo, looking all over the smooth flagstones as if expecting to see the traces of that visitation. ‚ÄúWhere did it come from?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt came from an English brig belonging to Milord Keith‚Äôs Squadron. She stood in quite close and opened fire on us.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Heaven only knows why. The audacity of your people! A single shot from one of those big fellows,‚Äù he continued, slapping the enormous bulging breech of the gun by his side, ‚Äúwould have been enough to sink her like a stone.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI can well believe it. But the fearlessness of our seamen has ceased to astonish the world long ago,‚Äù murmured the young traveller.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere are plenty of fearless people in the world, but luck is even better than courage. The brig sailed away unscathed. Yes, luck is even better than courage. Surer than wisdom and stronger than justice. Luck is a great thing. It is the only thing worth having on one‚Äôs side. And you people have always had it. Yes, signore, you belong to a lucky nation or else you would not be standing here on this platform looking across the water in the direction of that crumb of land that is the last refuge of your greatest enemy.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Cosmo leaned over the stone parapet near the embrasure of the gun on the other side of which the man with the short pipe in his hand made a vaguely emphatic gesture: ‚ÄúI wonder what thoughts pass through your head,‚Äù he went on in a quiet detached tone. ‚ÄúOr perhaps you are too young yet to have many thoughts in your head. Excuse my liberty, but I have always heard that one may be frank in speech with an Englishman; and by your speech there can be no doubt of you being of that nation.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI can assure you I have no thoughts of hatred.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Look, the Elban ship is getting farther away. Or is it only the darkness that makes her seem so?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe night air is heavy. There is more wind on the water than up here, where we stand; but I don‚Äôt think she has moved away. You are interested in that Elban ship, signore.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere is a fascination now about everything connected with that island,‚Äù confessed the ingenuous traveller. ‚ÄúYou have just said that I was too young to think. You don‚Äôt seem so very much older than myself. I wonder what thoughts you may have.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe thoughts of a common man, thoughts that could be of no interest to an English milord,‚Äù answered the other, in a grimly deprecatory tone.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDo you think that all Englishmen are lords?‚Äù asked Cosmo, with a laugh.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI didn‚Äôt think. I went by your appearance. I remember hearing an old man once say that you were a lordly nation.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúReally!‚Äù exclaimed the young man and laughed again in a low, pleasant note. ‚ÄúI remember hearing of an old man who called us a nation of traders.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚Äú<i xml:lang="it">Nazione di mercante</i>,‚Äù repeated the man slowly. ‚ÄúWell, that may be true too. Different men, different wisdoms.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThis didn‚Äôt occur to me,‚Äù said Cosmo, seating himself with a little spring on the stone parapet of the tower. He rested one foot on the massive gun-carriage and fixed his clear eyes on the dark red streak on the western sky left by the retreating sun like a long gash inflicted on the suffering body of the universe.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚ÄúDifferent men, different wisdoms,‚Äù he repeated, musingly. ‚ÄúI suppose it must be. People‚Äôs lives are so very different.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ And of what kind was the wisdom of your old man?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe wisdom of a great plain as level almost as the sea,‚Äù said the other gravely. ‚ÄúHis voice was as unexpected when I heard it as your own, signore. The evening shadows had closed about me just after I had seen to the west, on the edge of the world as it were, a lion miss his spring on a bounding deer. They went away right into the glow and vanished. It was as though I had dreamed. When I turned round there was the old man behind me no farther away than half the width of this platform. He only smiled at my startled looks. His long silver locks stirred in the breeze. He had been watching me, it seems, from folds of ground and from amongst reed beds for nearly half a day, wondering what I might be at. I had come ashore to wander on the plain. I like to be alone sometimes. My ship was anchored in a bight of this deserted coast a good many miles away, too many to walk back in the dark for a stranger like me. So I spent the night in that old man‚Äôs ranch, a hut of grass and reeds, near a little piece of water peopled by a multitude of birds. He treated me as if I had been his son. We talked till dawn and when the sun rose I did not go back to my ship. What I had on board of my own was not of much value, and there was certainly no one there to address me as ‚ÄúMy son‚Äù in that particular tone‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou know what I mean, signore.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt know‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut I think I can guess,‚Äù was the answer whose lighthearted yet earnest frankness was particularly boyish and provoked a smile on the part of the older man. In repose his face was grave. His English interlocutor went on after a pause. ‚ÄúYou deserted from your ship to join a hermit in a wilderness simply because the tone of his voice appealed to your heart. Is that your meaning?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou have guessed it, signorino. Perhaps there was more in it than that. There is no doubt about it that I did desert from my ship.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd where was that?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOn the coast of South America,‚Äù answered the man from the other side of the big gun, with sudden curtness. ‚ÄúAnd now it is time for us to part.‚Äù</p>
			<p>But neither of them stirred and for some time they remained silent, growing shadowy to each other on the massive tower, which itself, in the advancing night, was but a gray shadow above the dark and motionless sea.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHow long did you stay with that hermit in the desert?‚Äù asked Cosmo. ‚ÄúAnd how did you leave him?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSignore, it was he who left me. After I had buried his body I had nothing more to do there. I had learned much during that year.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat is it you learned, my friend? I should like to know.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSignore, his wisdom was not like that of other men and it would be too long to explain to you here on this tower and at this late hour of the day. I learned many things. How to be patient, for instance.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Don‚Äôt you think, signore, that your friends or the servants at the inn may become uneasy at your long absence?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI tell you I haven‚Äôt been much more than two hours in this town and I have spoken to nobody in it till I came upon you, except of course to the people at the inn.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThey may start looking for you.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhy should they trouble their heads? It isn‚Äôt late yet. Why should they notice my absence?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhy?‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Simply because your supper may be ready by this time,‚Äù retorted the man impatiently.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt may be, but I am not hungry yet,‚Äù said the young man casually. ‚ÄúLet them search for me all over the town if they like.‚Äù Then in a tone of interest, ‚ÄúDo you think they would think of looking for me here?‚Äù he asked.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo. This is the last spot anybody would think of,‚Äù muttered the other as if to himself. He raised his voice markedly, ‚ÄúWe must part indeed. Good night, signore.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGood night.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The man in the seaman‚Äôs jacket stared for a moment, then with a brusque movement cocked his cap with the strange tassel more on the side of his head. ‚ÄúI am not going away from this spot,‚Äù he said.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI thought you were. Why did you wish me good night then?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBecause we must part.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI suppose we must some time or other,‚Äù agreed Cosmo in a friendly voice. ‚ÄúI should like to meet you again.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe must part at once, this moment, on this tower.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhy?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBecause I want to be left alone,‚Äù answered the other after the slightest of pauses.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, come! Why on earth do you want to be left alone? What is it you could do here?‚Äù protested the other with great good humour. Then as if struck by an amusing notion, ‚ÄúUnless indeed you want to practise incantations,‚Äù he continued lightly, ‚Äúand perhaps call the Evil One to your side.‚Äù He paused. ‚ÄúThere are people, you know, that think it can be done,‚Äù he added in a mocking tone.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThey are not far wrong,‚Äù was the other‚Äôs ominous reply. ‚ÄúEach man has a devil not very far from his elbow. Don‚Äôt argue, signore, don‚Äôt call him up in me! You had better say no more and go in peace from here.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The young traveller did not change his careless attitude. The man in the cap heard him say quietly, almost in a tone of self-communion:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI prefer to stay in peace here.‚Äù</p>
			<p>It was indeed a wonderful peace. The sound of their quiet voices did not seem to affect it in the least. It had an enormous and overpowering amplitude which seemed rather to the man in the cap to take the part of the Englishman‚Äôs calm obstinacy against his growing anger. He couldn‚Äôt repress an impulsively threatening movement in the direction of his inconvenient companion but it died out in perplexity. He pushed his cap still more on one side and simply scratched his head.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou are one of those people that are accustomed to have their own way. Well, you can‚Äôt have your way this time. I have asked you quietly to leave me alone on this tower. I asked you as man to man. But if you won‚Äôt listen to reason I‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>Cosmo, putting the palms of his hands against the edge of the parapet, sprang lightly nearly to the middle of the platform and landed without a stagger. His voice was perfectly even.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúReason is my only guide,‚Äù he declared. ‚ÄúBut your request looks like mere caprice. For what can you possibly have to do here? The sea birds are gone to sleep and I have as much right to the air up here as you. Therefore‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>A thought seemed to strike him. ‚ÄúSurely this can‚Äôt be your trysting place,‚Äù he commented in a changed tone through which pierced a certain sympathy.</p>
			<p>A short scornful laugh from the other checked him and he muttered to himself soberly, ‚ÄúNo. Altogether unfit‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ amongst those grim old guns.‚Äù He raised his voice. ‚ÄúAll I can do is to give you all the room.‚Äù He backed away from the centre of the platform and perched himself this time on the massive breech of a sixty-pounder. ‚ÄúGo on with your incantations,‚Äù he said then to the tall and dim figure whose immobility appeared helpless for a moment. It broke the short period of silence, saying deliberately:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI suppose you are aware that at any time since we have begun to talk together it was open to me to fling myself upon you unawares as you sat on the parapet and knock you over to the bottom of this tower?‚Äù He waited a moment, then in a deeper tone, ‚ÄúWill you deny it?‚Äù he said.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo, I won‚Äôt deny it,‚Äù was the careless answer. ‚ÄúI hadn‚Äôt thought to be on my guard. But I can swim.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDon‚Äôt you know there is a border of big blocks of stone there? It would have been a terrible death.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ And now, will the signore do what I ask him and return to his inn which is a much safer place than this platform?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSafety is not a great inducement; and I don‚Äôt believe for a moment you ever thought of attacking me in a treacherous manner.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell,‚Äù the tall shadowy figure crowned by the shape of the strange cap admitted reluctantly. ‚ÄúWell, since you put it in those words, signore, I did not.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou see! I believe you are a fine fellow. But as it is I am under no sort of obligation to listen to you.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou are crafty,‚Äù burst out the other violently. ‚ÄúIt‚Äôs in the blood. How is one to deal with people like you?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou could try to drive me off,‚Äù suggested the other.</p>
			<p>There was no answer for a time, then the tall figure muttered reflectively to itself.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAfter all‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe‚Äôs an Englishman.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt think myself invincible on that account,‚Äù observed Cosmo calmly.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI know. I have fought against English soldiers in Buenos Aires. I was only thinking that, to give the devil his due, men of your nation don‚Äôt consort with spies or love tyranny either.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Tell me, is it true that you have only been two hours in this town?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúPerfectly true.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd yet all the tyrants of the world are your allies,‚Äù the shadowy man pursued his train of thought half aloud.</p>
			<p>The no less shadowy traveller remarked quietly into the gathering night:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou don‚Äôt know who my friends are.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt, but I think you are not likely to go with a tale to the Austrian spies or consort with the Piedmontese <i xml:lang="it">sbirri.</i> As to the priests who are poking their noses everywhere, I‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt know a single soul in Italy,‚Äù interrupted the other.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut you will soon. People like you make acquaintances everywhere. But it‚Äôs idle talk with strangers that I fear. Can I trust you as an Englishman not to talk of what you may see?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou may. I can‚Äôt imagine what unlawful thing you are about to commit here. I am dying from curiosity. Can it be that you are really some sort of sorcerer? Go on! Trace your magic circle if that is your business, and call up the spirits of the dead.‚Äù</p>
			<p>A low grunt was the only answer to this speech uttered in a tone between jest and earnest. Cosmo watched from the breech of his gun with intense interest the movements of the man who objected so strongly to his presence but who now seemed to pay no attention to him at all. They were not the movements of a magician in so far that they certainly had nothing to do with the tracing of circles. The figure had stepped over to the seaward face of the tower and seemed to be pulling endless things out of the breast pocket of his jacket. The young Englishman got down from the breech of the gun, without ceasing to peer in a fascinated way, and moved closer step by step till he threw himself back with an exclamation of astonishment. ‚ÄúBy heavens! The fellow is going to fish.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Cosmo remained mute with surprise for a good many seconds and then burst out loudly:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIs this what you displayed all this secrecy for? This is the worst hoax I ever‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúCome nearer, signore, but take care not to tangle all my twine with your feet.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Do you see this box?‚Äù</p>
			<p>The heads of the two men had come together confidentially and the young traveller made out a cylindrical object which was in fact a round tin box. His companion thrust it into his hand with the request, ‚ÄúHold it for me a moment, signore,‚Äù and then Cosmo had the opportunity to ascertain that the lid of it was hermetically sealed. The man in the strange cap dived into the pocket of his breeches for flint and steel. The Englishman beheld with surprise his lately inimical companion squeeze himself between the massive tube of the piece of ordnance and the wall of stone and wriggle outwards into the depth of, the thick embrasure till nothing of him remained visible but his black stockings and the soles of his heavy shoes. After a time his voice came deadened along the thickness of the wall:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWill you hand me the box now, signore?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Cosmo, enlisted in these mysterious proceedings, the nature of which was becoming clear enough to him, obeyed at once, and approaching the embrasure thrust the box in at the full length of his arm till it came in contact with the ready hand of the man who was lying flat on his stomach with his head projecting beyond the wall of the tower. His groping hand found and snatched away the box. The twine was attached to the box and at once its length laid on the platform began to run out till the very end disappeared. Then the man lying prone within the thickness of the gun embrasure lay still as death and the young traveller strained his ears in the absolute silence to catch the slightest sound at the foot of the tower. But all he could hear was the faint sound of some distant clock striking somewhere in the town. He waited a little longer, then in the cautious tone of a willing accomplice murmured within the opening:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGot a bite yet?‚Äù</p>
			<p>The answer came hardly audible:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo. But this is the very hour.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Cosmo felt his interest growing. And yet the facts in themselves were not very exciting, but all this had the complexion and the charm of an unexpected adventure, heightened by its mystery, playing itself out before that old town towering like a carved hill decorated with lights that began to appear quickly on the sombre and colossal mass of that lofty shore. The last gleam had died out in the west. The harbour was dark except for the lantern at the stern of the British ship of the line. The man in the embrasure made a slight movement. Cosmo became more alert but apparently nothing happened. There was no murmur of voices, splash of water, or sign of the slightest stir all round the tower. Suddenly the man in the embrasure began to wriggle back on to the platform and in a very few minutes stood up to his full height facing the unexpected helper.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShe has come and gone,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúDid you hear anything, signore?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNot a sound. She might have been the ghost of a boat‚ÅÝ‚Äîfor you are alluding to a boat, are you not?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚Äú<i xml:lang="it">Si.</i> And I hope that if any eye on shore had made her out it had taken her for only a ghost. Of course that English vessel of war rows guard at night. But it isn‚Äôt to look out for ghosts.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI should think not. Ghosts are of no account. Could there be anything more futile than the ghost of a boat?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou are one of the strong-minded, signore. Ghosts are the concern of the ignorant‚ÅÝ‚Äîyet who knows? But it does sound funny to talk of the ghost of a boat, a thing of brute matter. For wouldn‚Äôt a ghost be a thing of spirit, a man‚Äôs soul itself made restless by grief or love, or remorse or anger? Such are the stories that one hears. But the old hermit of the plain, of whom I spoke, assured me that the dead are too glad to be done with life to make trouble on earth.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou and your hermit!‚Äù exclaimed Cosmo in a boyish and marvelling tone. ‚ÄúI suppose it is no use me asking you what I have been just helping you in.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúA little smuggling operation, signore. Surely, signore, England has custom houses and therefore must have smugglers too.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOne has heard of them of course. But I wouldn‚Äôt mind a bet that there is not one of them that resembles you. Neither do I believe that they deal with packages as small as the one you lowered into that ghostly boat. You saw her of course. There was a boat.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere was somebody to cut the string, as you see, signore. Look, here is all that twine, all of it but a little piece. It may have been a man swimming in the dark water. A man with a soul, fit to make a ghost of‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ let us call him a ghost, signore.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh yes, let us,‚Äù the other said lightly. ‚ÄúI am sure that when I wake up tomorrow all this will seem to me a dream. Even now I feel inclined to pinch myself.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat‚Äôs that for, in Heaven‚Äôs name?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs a saying we have in our country. Yes, you, your hermit, our talk, and this very tower, all this will be like a dream.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI would say ‚Äònothing better‚Äô if it was not that most people are only too ready to talk about their dreams. No, signore, let all this be to you of less consequence than if it were a tale of ghosts, of mere ghosts in which you do not believe. You forced yourself on me as if you were the lord of this place, but I feel friendly enough to you.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI didn‚Äôt ask for your friendship,‚Äù retorted the young traveller in a clear voice so void of all offence that the other man accepted it for a mere statement of a fact.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúCertainly not. I spoke of my own feelings, and though I am, you may say, a newcomer and a stranger in my own native city, I assure you it is better to have me for a friend than for an enemy. And the best thing of all would be to forget all about me. It would be also the kindest thing you could do.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúReally?‚Äù said Cosmo in a tone of sympathy. ‚ÄúHow can you expect me to forget the most extraordinary thing that ever happened to me in all my life?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIn all your life! H‚Äôm! You have a long life before you yet, signorino.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, but this is an adventure.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs what I mean. You have so many marvellous adventures before you, signorino, that this one is sure to be forgotten very soon. Then why not at once?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo, my friend, you don‚Äôt seem somehow a person one could easily forget.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚ÅÝ‚∏∫ God forbid.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Good night, signore.‚Äù</p>
			<p>No sooner were the words out of his mouth than the man in the cap bounded across the platform, dived into the black square opening on its landward side, and ran down the steps so lightly that not a sound reached the ears of the other. Cosmo went down the winding stair, but cautiously in the profound darkness. The door at the bottom stood open and he stepped out on to the deserted jetty. He could see on it nothing in the shape of a fleeting shadow.</p>
			<p>On the very edge of the shore a low little building with three arcades sent a dim gleam of light through its open door. It seemed to be a sort of guardroom, for there was a sentry, an Austrian soldier apparently, in a white coat. His duty, however, seemed to be concerned with the landing-steps in front of the guardhouse, and he let the young traveller pass on as though he had not seen him at all. Dark night had settled upon the long quay. Here and there a dim street lamp threw a feeble light on the uneven stones which the feet of the young traveller with his springy walk seemed hardly to touch. The pleasurable sensation of something extraordinary having happened to him accelerated his movements. He was also feeling very hungry and he was making haste towards his inn to dine first and then to think his adventure over, for there was a strong conviction within him that he certainly had had an adventure of a nature at the same time stimulating and obscure.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
