<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-2-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
			<p>He shut the door behind him gently and remained between it and the screen. He had expected to be followed at once by Adèle. What could be detaining her? But he remembered the remarkable proportions of that suite of reception rooms. He had seen some apartments in Paris, but nothing quite so long as that. The old Marquis would no doubt conduct the little Madame Bubna to the very door of the anteroom. The ambassador of The Most Christian King owed that attention to the representative of His Apostolic Majesty and Commander-in-Chief of the Austrian troops. This was the exact form which his thought took. The Christian King, the Apostolic Majesty⁠—all those submerged heads were bobbing up out of the subsiding flood.</p>
			<p>He pictured them to himself in their mental simplicity and with their grand air; the Marquis magnificent and ageing, and the dutiful daughter by his side with her radiant head and her divine form. It was impossible to believe that these two had also been submerged at one time.</p>
			<p>All those people were mere playthings, reflected Cosmo without a pang. But who or what was playing with them? he thought further, boldly, and remained for a moment as if amused by the marvellousness of it, in the manner of people watching the changes on the stage. But what could have become of them?</p>
			<p>She might next moment be opening the door. Could she have made him stay behind because she wanted to speak with him alone? Why, yes, obviously. Cosmo did not ask himself what she wanted to talk to him about. It was no wonder that he felt, it was a subtle emotion resembling impatience for the arrival of a promised felicity of an indefinite kind. All this was by no means poignant. It was merely delightfully disturbing.</p>
			<p>“I shall have a tête-à-tête; that’s clear,” he thought, as he advanced into the room. The air all around him was delightfully warm. Whatever she would have to say would be wonderful because of her voice. He would look her in the face. She did not intimidate him and it was impossible to have too much of that. After all, he thought, immensely amused, it was only Adèle, Ad⁠—⁠</p>
			<p>His mental monologue was cut short by the shock of perceiving, seated on the painted sofa, a man who was looking at him in perfect silence and immobility. The fact was that Count Helion, having come into the boudoir sooner than his wife had expected him to do, had directed his eyes to the screen ever since he had heard the opening and the shutting of the door. One of his hands was resting on his thigh, the other hung down holding negligently a number of some gazette which was partly resting on the floor. Though not very big, that piece of paper attracted Cosmo’s eyes; and it was in this way that he became aware of the brown fingers covered with rings, of the gaunt legs encased in silk stockings, and of the crossed feet in dress shoes with gold buckles, almost before he took in the impression of the broad but lean face which seemed to have been stained with walnut juice long enough for the stain to have worn down thin, letting the native pallor come through. The same tint extended to the bald top of the head. But what was really extraordinary was the hair: two patches of black behind each temple, obviously dyed. The man, as to whose identity Cosmo could have no doubt, got up, displaying the full length of his bony frame, in a tense and soldierly stiffness associated with cross-belts and a cowhide knapsack on the back. “A grenadier,” thought Cosmo, startled by this unexpected meeting, which also caused him profound annoyance, as though he had been induced to walk into a trap. What he could not understand was why the man should make that grimace at him. It convulsed his whole physiognomy, involving his lips, his cheeks, and his very eyes in a sort of spasm. The most awful thing was that it stayed there.⁠ ⁠… “Why, it’s a smile,” thought Cosmo, with sudden relief. It was so sudden that it broke into a smile without any particular volition of his own. Thereupon the face of Count Helion recovered its normal aspect and Cosmo heard his voice for the first time. It proceeded from the depths of his chest. It was resonant and blurred and portentous with an effect of stiffness somehow in accord with the man’s bearing. It informed Cosmo that Count Helion had been waiting in the Countess’s boudoir on purpose to make his acquaintance, while in the man’s eyes there was a watchfulness as though he had been uttering a momentous disclosure and was anxious as to its effect. A perfectly horizontal, jet-black moustache underlining the nose of Count Helion, which was broad at the base and thin at the end, suggested comic possibilities in that head, which had too much individuality to be looked upon by Cosmo simply as the head of Adèle’s husband; and Cosmo hardly looked at it in that light. His hold on that fact was slippery. He preserved his equanimity perfectly and said that he himself had wondered whether he would have the pleasure of making the Count’s acquaintance that evening. Both men sat down.</p>
			<p>“My occupations kept me late to-night,” said the Count. “The courier came in.”</p>
			<p>He pointed with his fingers to the gazette lying on the floor, and Cosmo asked if there were any news.</p>
			<p>“In the gazette, no. At least nothing interesting. The world is full of vanities and scandals, rumours of conspiracies. Very poor stuff. I don’t know any of those people the papers mention every day. That’s more my wife’s affair. For years now she has spent about ten months of every year in Paris or near Paris. I am a provincial. My interests are in the orphanage I have founded in my native country. I am also building an asylum for⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>He got up suddenly, approached the mantelpiece in three strides, and turned round exactly like a soldier in the ranks of a company changing front. He was wearing a blue coat cut away in front and having a long skirt, something recalling the cut of a uniform, though the material was fine and there was a good deal of gold lace about it, as also on his white satin waistcoat. Cosmo recalled the vague story he had heard about Count de Montevesso having served in more than one army before being given the rank of general by the King of Piedmont. The man had been drilled. Cosmo wondered whether he had ever been caned. He was a military adventurer of the commonest type. Some of them have been known to return with a fortune got by pillage and intrigue and possibly even by real talents of a sort in the service of oriental courts full of splendours and crimes, tyrannies and treacheries and dark drama of ambition, or love.</p>
			<p>“He is the very thing,” Cosmo exclaimed mentally, gating at the stiff figure leaning against the mantelpiece. Of course he got his fortune in India. What was remarkable about him was that he had managed to get away with his plunder, or at any rate a part of it, considerable enough to enable him to make a figure in the world and marry Adèle d’Armand in England. That was only because of the Revolution. In royal France he would not have had the ghost of a chance; and even as it was, only the odious laxity of London society in accepting rich strangers had given him his opportunity. Cosmo, forcing himself to envisage this dubious person as the husband of Adèle, felt very angry with the light-minded tolerance extended to foreigners characteristic of a certain part of London society. It was perfectly outrageous.</p>
			<p>“Where the devil can my wife be?”</p>
			<p>Those words made Cosmo start, though they had not been uttered very loudly. Almost mechanically he answered: “I don’t know,” and noticed that Count Helion was staring at him in a curiously unintelligent manner.</p>
			<p>“I was really asking myself,” muttered the latter and stirred uneasily, without however taking his elbow off the mantelpiece. “It’s a natural thought since we are, God knows why, kept waiting for her here. I wasn’t aware I had spoken. Living for many years amongst people who didn’t understand any European language⁠—I had hundreds of them in my palace in Sindh⁠—I got into the habit of talking aloud, strange as it may appear to you.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Cosmo, with an air of innocence. “I suppose one acquires all sorts of strange habits in those distant countries. We in England have a class of men who return from India enriched. They are called nabobs. Some of them have most objectionable habits. Unluckily their mere wealth⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“There is nothing to compare with wealth,” interrupted the other in a soldierly voice and paused, then continued in the same tone of making a verbal report: “When I was in England I had the privilege to know many people of position. They were very kind to me. They didn’t seem to think lightly of wealth.”</p>
			<p>Each phrase came curt, detached, but it was evident that the man did not mean to be offensive. Those statements originated obviously in sincere conviction; and after the Count had uttered them there appeared on his forehead the horizontal wrinkles of unintelligent worry. Cosmo asked himself whether the man before him was not really very stupid. Under the elevated eyebrows his eyes looked worn and empty of all thought.</p>
			<p>“Lots of money, I mean,” M. de Montevesso began again. “Not your savings and scrapings. Money that one acquires boldly and enough of it to be profuse with.”</p>
			<p>“Is he going to treat me to vulgar boasting?” thought Cosmo. He wished that Adèle would come in and interrupt this tête-à-tête which was so very different from the one he had been expecting.</p>
			<p>“I daresay money is very useful,” he assented, with airy scorn which he thought might put an end to the subject. But his interlocutor persisted.</p>
			<p>“You can’t know anything about it,” he affirmed, then added unexpectedly: “Money will give you even ideas. Lots of ideas. The worst of it is that any one of them may turn out damnable. Well, yes. There is of course danger in money, but what of that?”</p>
			<p>“It can scarcely be if it is used for good works, as you seem to use it,” said Cosmo with polite indifference. He meant it to be final, but Count de Montevesso was not to be suppressed.</p>
			<p>“It leads one into worries,” he said. “For instance, that orphanage of mine, it is really a very large place. I am trying to be a benefactor to my native province, but I want it to be in my own way. Well, since the Restoration, the priests are trying to get hold of it. They want to turn it to the glory of God and to the service of religion. I have seen enough of all sorts of religions not to know what that means. No sooner had the King entered Paris than the Bishop wrote to me pointing out that there was no chapel and suggesting that I should build one and appoint a chaplain. That Bishop is⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>He threw up his head suddenly and Cosmo became aware of the presence of Adèle without having heard even the rustle of her dress. He stood up hastily. There was a short silence.</p>
			<p>“I see the acquaintance is made,” said Adèle, looking from one to the other. Her eyes lingered on Cosmo and then turned to her husband. “I didn’t know you would be already here. I had to help my father to his room. I would have come at once here but he detained me.” Again she turned to Cosmo. “You will pardon me.”</p>
			<p>“I found Count Helion here. I have not been alone for a minute,” said Cosmo. “You owe me no apologies. I was delighted to make your husband’s acquaintance, even if you were not here to introduce us to each other.”</p>
			<p>This was said in English and Count Helion by the mantelpiece waited till Cosmo had finished before he asked, “Where’s Clelia?”</p>
			<p>“I have sent her to bed,” said Countess de Montevesso. “Helion, my father would like to see you this evening.”</p>
			<p>“I am at the orders of M. le Marquis.”</p>
			<p>The grenadier-like figure at the mantelpiece did not stir, and those words were followed only by a slight twitch in the muscles of the face which might have had a sardonic intention. “To-night, at once,” he repeated. “But with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Latham here?”</p>
			<p>“Pray don’t mind me, I am going away directly,” said Cosmo. “It is getting late.”</p>
			<p>“In Italy it is never late. I hope to find you here when I return. As the husband of a daughter of the house of D’Armand I know what is due to the name of Latham. Am I really expected at once?”</p>
			<p>Adèle moved forward a step or two, speaking rapidly. “There has been some news from Elba, or about Elba, which gives a certain concern to my father. As you have been to the public knowledge in direct touch with people from Elba my father would like to have your opinion.”</p>
			<p>Count Helion changed his attitude, and leaning his shoulders against the mantelpiece addressed himself to Cosmo.</p>
			<p>“It was the most innocent thing in the world. It was something about the project for the exploitation of the Island of Pianosa. Napoleon sent his treasurer here to get in touch with a banker. I am a man of affairs. The banker consulted me⁠—as a man who knew the spot. It’s true I know the spot, but if you hear it said that it is because of my relations with the Dey of Algiers, pray don’t believe it. I am in no way in touch with the Barbary States.”</p>
			<p>He made a step forward, and then another, and stood still. “You two had better sit down and talk. Yes, sit down and talk. Renew the acquaintance of your early youth⁠ ⁠… your early youth,” he repeated in a faint voice. “Those youthful friendships⁠ ⁠…” he made a convulsive grimace which Cosmo had discovered to be the effect of a smile. “There is something so charming in those youthful friendships. As to myself I don’t remember ever being youthful.” He stepped out towards the door through which Cosmo had seen Clelia enter that morning. “Let me find you when I return, enjoying yourselves most sentimentally. Most delightful.”</p>
			<p>His long stiff back swayed in the doorway and the door came to with a crash.</p>
			<p>Cosmo and Adèle looked at each other with a smile. Cosmo, hat in hand, asked just audibly, “I suppose I had better stay?” She made an affirmative sign and, moving away from him, put her foot on the marble fender of the fireplace where nothing was left but hot ashes hiding a reddish glow.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
